---
tags:
---
# 2026-04-11
- How will you record reflective practice in your journal?
	- Don't know yet but will take notes here.
- Which journal tool will you use?
	- Obsidian

## Sets
### Definition:
A "well-defined" collection of any kind of objects such as people, ideas, numbers, etc.
An **unordered** collection of **unique** objects.

### Mathematical notations.
Sets are enclosed in curly brackets `{` and `}` with values separated by commas `,`, for example:

A set "E" of all even integers smaller than 10: $E=\{ 2, 4, 6, 8 \}$
An empty set is: $Z=\{\}$
or $Z=\varnothing$

Notation for elements in a set:
The $\in$ notation is used when a value is a member of the given set.
The $\notin$ notation is used when a value is not a member of a given set.
>[!EXAMPLE]
>$E=\{0,1,2\}$ 
>$2\in E$
>$3\notin E$ 
### Cardinality
Cardinality of a set is the number of elements inside a set (or the length of a set) and it is represented with the pipe symbol:
Examples:
> [!EXAMPLE] 
$|A|= 4$  where $A=\{1,2,3,4\}$
$|B|=\varnothing$  where $B=\{\}$
>$|B|=\{\}$  where $B=\{\}$

### Subset of a set $\subseteq$
$A$ is said to be a subset of $B$ only if every element in $A$ is also an element of $B$. In this case, we write $A\subseteq B$

An empty set is a sub-set of any set.
Any set is a subset of itself, as it satisfies the definition of what a subset is.

>[!EXAMPLE]
>$A=\{0,1,2\}$
>$B=\{0,1,2,3,4\}$
>$C=\{-3,-2,-1\}$
>$D=\{\}$
>$A\subseteq B$
>$B\subseteq B$
>$C\not\subseteq B$
>$D\subseteq B$
### Special Sets $\mathbb N, \mathbb Z, \mathbb Q, \mathbb R$
- $\mathbb{N}$ = Set of **natural numbers** = $\{1,2,3,4\dots\}$
- $\mathbb{Z}$ = Set of **integers** = $\{\dots,-3,-2,-1,0,1,2,3,\dots\}$ 
	- An **integer** is a whole number that can be positive, negative, or zero. It is a number with no fractional or decimal parts.
- $\mathbb{Q}$ = Set of **rational numbers** = (of form $a/b$ where $a$ and $b$ are elements of $Z$ and $b\neq0$) or: 
	- The mathematical notation that represents these is: $$\mathbb{Q} = \{ \frac{a}{b} \mid a, b \in \mathbb{Z}, b \neq 0 \}$$
	- A rational number is any number that can be expressed as a ratio (a fraction) of two integers
- $\mathbb{R}$ = Set of **real numbers**
	- Real numbers represent all numbers of any continuous number line, they can include **rational** numbers as well as **irrational** ($\mathbb{I}$) numbers (these are numbers that cannot be written as simple fractions. Their decimals go on forever, such as $\sqrt 2$ or $\pi \approx 3.14159...$), and certainly all **integers** and **natural** numbers. The only things that are not **real** number are **imaginary** numbers such as $\sqrt -1$

> [!THEREFORE] 
$N\subseteq Z\subseteq Q\subseteq R$

### Additional Special Sets $\mathbb I$ and $\mathbb C$
- $\mathbb I$ = Set of **irrational numbers**
	- Numbers that cannot be written as a simple fraction ba​. Their decimals go on forever, are non-repeating and infinite.
	- _Examples of members:_ 
		- Famous constants such as: $\pi \approx 3.14159\dots$ or $e\approx 2.71828\dots$ 
		- Non-perfect roots such as $\sqrt{2}$, $\sqrt{3}$ or $\sqrt{5}$
		- Golden ratio: $$\phi = \frac{1 + \sqrt{5}}{2} \approx 1.618$$
- $\mathbb C$ = Set of **complex numbers**
	- Numbers expressed as $a+bi$ where $a$ and $b$ are real numbers and $i$ is the imaginary unit
	- *Examples of members* $5i, 2+3i, \sqrt −16=4i$

### Set builder notation
We can express sets with the **listing notation** as we have done before, for example, given a set $A$ that represents all even positive integers can be written as: $A=\{2,4,6,8\dots\}$

But we can also use the **set builder notation** and write it as: $A=\{2n \mid n\in \mathbb{N}\}$
Here the pipe symbol, (sometimes replaced by a colon "$:$" for clarity if the formula itself already contains vertical bars), represents the terms "such that" for exemple, two times $n$ such that $n$ is a member of $\mathbb{N}$

> [!EXAMPLE] 
> The set of things in my bag:
> $Bag = \{\textit{pen, books, laptop,}\dots\}$
> $Bag = \{ x \mid x \textit{ is in my bag} \}$

> [!EXAMPLE] 
> $S_1=\{3,6,9,12\}$
> $S_1=\{3n \mid n \in \mathbb{Z} \text{ and } 1<=n<=4 \}$
> $S_1=\{3n \mid n \in \mathbb{N} \text{ and } n<=4 \}$
> 
> $S_2=\{1,2,4,8,16\}$
> $S_2=\{2^n \mid n \in \mathbb{Z} \text{ and } 0<=n<=4 \}$
> 
> $S_3=\{2^0,2^{-1},2^{-2},2^{-3},2^{-4}\}$
> $S_3 = \{1, \frac{1}{2},\frac{1}{4},\frac{1}{8},\frac{1}{16}\}$ 
> $S_3=\{2^{-n} \mid n \in \mathbb{N} \text{ and } n<=4\}$
> 
> $S_4=\{\dots -9,-6,-3,0,3,6,9 \dots\}$
> $S_4=\{3n \mid n \in \mathbb{Z}\}$

## Powerset of a set

Sets can contain other sets as their elements. When they do, those sets are members of the set but their children are not direct members of the set:
>[!EXAMPLE]
>$A=\{1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9\}$
>$B=\{\{1,2,3,4\},\{5,6\},\{7,8,9\}\}$
>Therefore:
>$\{1,2,3,4\} \subseteq A$
>$\{1,2,3,4\} \in B$ 
>$\{1,2,3,4\} \not\subseteq B$ 
>$\{\{1,2,3,4\}\} \subseteq B$ 

### Definition:
Given a set $S$, the **powerset** of $S$, or $P(S)$, is the set containing all the subsets of $S$
> [!Example]
> $S=\{1,2,3\}$
> The subsets of $S$ are:
> $\varnothing, \{1\}, \{2\}, \{3\},$
> $\{1,2\}, \{1,3\}, \{2,3\},$
> $\{1,2,3\}$
> Therefore:
> $P(S)=\{\varnothing, \{1\}, \{2\}, \{3\}, \{1,2\}, \{1,3\}, \{2,3\}, \{1,2,3\}\}$

### The powerset of $\varnothing$
$\varnothing \in \varnothing$ the empty set is the only subset of the empty set
$P(\varnothing) = \{\varnothing\}$ the powerset of the empty set is the set containing the empty set
$\varnothing \subseteq P(\varnothing)$ the empty set is a subset of the powerset of the emptyset
$\{\varnothing\}\subseteq P(\varnothing)$ the set containing the empty set is also a subset of the powerset of the empty set
$P(P(\varnothing))= \{\varnothing,\{\varnothing\}\}$ and the powerset of the powerset of the empty set is the set containing both the empty set, and the set containing the empty set.

## Relationship between the cardinality of a set and the cardinality of it's powerset
Given a set $S$, then $\mid P(S) \mid = 2^{\mid S \mid}$
